TO TAKE CARE OF ME.
Woman: WHAT, HONEY?
Narrator:
BROTHERS AND SISTERS...
Woman: DID YOU DROP
ALL THAT YOGURT?
Narrator:
SOMETIMES THEY'RE PERFECT.
Girl: SHE'S NOT PERFECT,
AND SHE WANTS TO BE PERFECT.
Woman:
WHAT'S GOING ON HERE?
Narrator:
SOMETIMES THEY'RE NOT.
( crying )
Narrator:
TODAY, A NEW LOOK INSIDE
THE WORLD OF SIBLINGS.
AND NEW FINDINGS
ABOUT HOW BIRTH ORDER
AFFECTS YOUR CHILD'S
PERSONALITY.
WE OFTEN SEE
SECOND-BORNS WHO ARE
EXTREMELY COMPETITIVE.
AND SUCCESSFUL,
'CAUSE THEY'VE FOUND
A ROLE FOR THEMSELVES.
Narrator:
BRAZELTON ON PARENTING.
( theme music playing )
HAVING A CHILD IS ONE
OF THE MOST WONDERFUL THINGS
A MAN OR WOMAN
CAN EXPERIENCE.
HAVING MORE THAN ONE
IS GREAT TOO,
BUT BELIEVE ME,
IT'S A WHOLE DIFFERENT
ADVENTURE IN PARENTING.
ONE OF THE QUESTIONS
I'M MOST OFTEN ASKED BY PARENTS
IS HOW THEY CAN HELP THEIR
CHILDREN TO GET ALONG BETTER.
THE SHORT ANSWER IS,
BY SIMPLY STAYING OUT OF IT.
THE LONGER ONE INVOLVES
A DEEPER LOOK
INTO THE COMPLEX DYNAMICS
OF PARENTS AND SIBLINGS.
Woman: RACHEL AND ERIKA
ARE ONLY A YEAR APART,
SO IT WAS VERY
CHALLENGING THEN,
BUT I THINK WHEN
HANNAH CAME ALONG,
SHE WAS A LITTLE MORE WORK,
BUT NOT QUITE AS MUCH WORK
AND IT WAS...
YOU KNOW,
IT'S JUST NON-STOP.
Man: THE EXPECTATIONS FOR
HAVING THE THIRD WAS LIKE,
"OH MY GOD,
WHAT ARE WE GONNA DO
WITH THREE CHILDREN?
WE'RE NEVER GONNA
BE ABLE TO GET OUT.
ARE WE'RE CRAZY TAKING THIS ON
AT SUCH A YOUNG AGE?"
BUT, YOU KNOW,
IT'S ACTUALLY TURNED OUT TO BE
BETTER, ACTUALLY,
WITH HANNAH.
BUT IT'S NOTHING WE
HAVEN'T SEEN BEFORE.
IT'S JUST,
"OH NO, AGAIN."
IT WAS EXTREMELY
OVERWHELMING, I THINK.
EXTREMELY OVERWHELMING
TO KNOW THAT WE'D HAVE FIVE
CHILDREN FIVE AND UNDER.
BABY.
AND HOW WE WOULD MANAGE
THAT AND THE HOUSEHOLD
AND THE RESPONSIBILITY.
WHAT ARE WE HAVING HERE?
BOYS OR GIRLS?
GIRLS.
- NO, BOYS!
- YOU THINK THEY'RE BOYS?
Woman: YES, IT WAS OVERWHELMING,
BUT THE SHOCK IS OVER
AND WE'VE GRABBED IT BY
THE HORNS, AND WE ARE READY.
- GIRLS!
- THEY'RE GIRLS.
I ALWAYS WANTED, SAY,
DREAMED OF HAVING
FOUR AND FIVE CHILDREN.
WE DIDN'T REALLY HAVE ONE CHILD
BECAUSE RACHEL WAS--
I GOT PREGNANT WHEN SHE WAS
ONLY THREE MONTHS OLD.
SHE DIDN'T HAVE THAT WHOLE
LITTLE LIFE OF HER OWN
FOR A WHILE, YOU KNOW,
AND THEN IT JUST BECAME
THE TWO OF THEM.
SHE DOESN'T REMEMBER ANYTHING
BESIDES LIFE WITH ERIKA.
THAT HAS REALLY FOSTERED
THEIR RELATIONSHIP A LOT.
BEFORE HANNAH, THEY DIDN'T
REALLY SEE THE DISTINCTION
OF THE OLDER ONE
AND THE YOUNGER ONE.
JUST LIKE, "WE'RE THE KIDS
AND THEY'RE THE PARENTS."
AND WHEN HANNAH CAME,
IT REALLY DEFINED THE FAMILY.
SHE WAS THE BABY AND THEY ALL
KIND OF SAW THEIR LITTLE PLACE.
OH, LOOK WHAT
ERIKA BROUGHT YOU.
Woman: NOLAN, UM,
THE BOYS LOVED RIGHT AWAY.
Man: WELL, JOEY KNEW MORE
OF WHAT WAS HAPPENING
AND HE WAS THERE
TO SUPPORT AND HELP HER
PLAY THE ROLE OF
THE BIG BROTHER,
AND NOL--
EVAN WAS I THINK
THE ONE THAT WAS--
POOR THING.
WAS MORE LIKE,
"WHEN'S THE CHANCE?
WHEN MOMMY'S NOT LOOKING,
I'M GONNA STEAL HIS BLANKET."
Woman: AND THEY CERTAINLY TOOK
ADVANTAGE OF EVERY MOMENT THAT
WHEN WE WERE WITH THE BABY,
TO EITHER DESTROY THE HOUSE
OR TO HURT EACH OTHER
OR FIGHT
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
RACHEL IS VERY OUTGOING.
SHE JUST GOES FULL FORCE
INTO EVERYTHING.
Woman: TWO DIFFERENT TEACHERS
HAVE SAID THAT SHE'S LIKE
GONNA A WOMAN OF THE NINETIES
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT,
WHICH I THOUGHT WAS
SO FUNNY AT FOUR YEARS OLD,
BUT SHE GIVES THAT IMPRESSION.
WHERE ERIKA,
AS THE MIDDLE CHILD,
SHE'S EXTREMELY INTELLIGENT
AND SHE THINKS.
MY DAUGHTER, SHE'S GONNA BE
ONE OF THOSE STUDENTS
THAT MAY SIT IN CLASS,
ALWAYS KNOW THE ANSWER,
BUT MAY NEVER RAISE HER HAND
AND GIVE IT OUT.
HER HUMOR IS, UH,
IT'S MORE OFF THE CUFF,
AND HANNAH'S JUST RIGHT NOW
IN HER OWN WHATEVER--
A BUG FLYING BY JUST
CRACKS HER UP, OR WHATEVER.
SO, I MEAN, THAT'S JUST
THE CUTENESS OF BEING
A TWO-YEAR-OLD.
OF COURSE YOU HAVE TO HAVE
A HIGH TOLERANCE LEVEL
WHEN YOU HAVE
THREE YOUNG BOYS.
RIGHT HERE?
WHAT DID EVAN DO?
HE HIT ME IN THE HEAD
WITH THE BAT.
- EVAN, WHAT DO YOU
SAY TO JOEY?
- SORRY.
THEN YOU HAVE TO
GIVE 'EM SOME SPACE
TO FEEL OUT AND--
Woman: WORK IT OUT
AMONGST EACH OTHER
IS WHAT YOU'RE SAYING.
Man: WE DON'T WANT TO INTERVENE
50 OUT OF 60 MINUTES AN HOUR,
IF THAT WERE THE CASE.
I ALMOST HAVE IT FIGURED OUT
THAT'S IT LIKE ONCE AN HOUR,
YOU KNOW,
SOMETHING ERUPTS.
AND I'D ALWAYS BE
RIGHT THERE LIKE,
"OKAY, OKAY, LET'S STOP."
I THINK ONCE HANNAH CAME ALONG,
I PROBABLY DIDN'T HAVE
THE TIME TO DO THAT,
AND SO THEY HAVE LEARNED TO
WORK THINGS OUT ON THEIR OWN.
AND NOW I'LL EVEN
SAY TO THEM,
IF ONE OF THEM COMES
RUNNING TO ME WITH,
"SHE DID THIS,
SHE DID THAT," AND, UM--
MY RESPONSE NOW,
INSTEAD OF YELLING,
IS TO JUST SAY,
"LET'S TRY TO WORK IT OUT."
LOOK OUT!
AAH!
Man:
HEY, HEY, HEY.
Woman:
DISCIPLINING THE CHILDREN.
SHE'S PROBABLY MORE VERBAL.
PROBABLY? SHE IS.
Woman: I DO NOT WANT YOU
DOING THAT, PLEASE.
- Man: I'M MORE, UM--
- Woman: PATIENT.
I SAW YOU GO BANGIN'
INTO THE DOOR.
I'LL SAY, "THIS IS
UNACCEPTABLE BEHAVIOR."
I'LL EXPLAIN
VERY STRAIGHTFORWARD
WHY IT'S UNACCEPTABLE,
AND THEN TELL THEM
WHAT I EXPECT THEM TO DO.
...BANGING THE DOOR,
I TOLD YOU TO STOP, RIGHT?
- OKAY.
- LOOK WHAT HAPPENED.
LOOK WHAT HAPPENED.
I'LL SAY,
"DO YOU UNDERSTAND?"
AND HE'LL TURN HIS HEAD
AND SAY, "HUH."
AND I'LL GRAB HIM AND SAY,
"LOOK ME IN THE EYE."
DO YOU UNDERSTAND?
COVER YOUR MOUTH.
GOOD BOY.
- DO YOU UNDERSTAND?
- YEAH.
WHEN I GET THE YES, I SAY,
"GOOD, IT'S A DEAL."
GIVE ME FIVE.
OKAY.
Man: YEAH!
ALL RIGHT.
THROW THOSE
COOKIES.
I SPEND A LOT OF
ONE-ON-ONE WITH HANNAH
BECAUSE THE OTHER TWO
ARE THEIR OWN PLAYMATES.
- ( Hannah mutters )
- YOU CAN GIVE THEM TO ME.
HOW MANY
ARE THERE?
- ONE.
- TWO.
DID YOU PUT A ROCK
IN MY POCKET?
- NO!
- A YEAR-AND-A-HALF AGO?
OKAY, STOP.
Woman:
I'VE TAKEN RACHEL OUT
A COUPLE TIMES.
YOU ARE GOOD
AT THOSE EGGS.
ANY SHELLS?
- NOPE.
- ALL RIGHT!
Woman: IT'S JUST WONDERFUL, JUST
THE EASE OF OUR CONVERSATIONS
AND NOT BEING INTERRUPTED.
YOU CAN LICK
YOUR FINGERS,
ALL RIGHT.
YOU KNOW, JUST MAKING THEM
FEEL IMPORTANT.
Man: ONE-ON-ONE WITH ERIKA IS--
IT'S BEEN A LOT OF FUN.
SUCH A NICE--
WHAT COLOR ARE YOUR LEGS?
Man: SHE'S GOT A SIMILAR
SENSE OF HUMOR TO WHAT I HAVE.
LIKE 'EM GREEN?
- NO.
- ORANGE?
I'M THE ONLY MALE IN THE HOUSE.
THEY KNOW THAT.
THEY'RE ALWAYS GIVING ME A HARD
TIME ABOUT THAT A LITTLE BIT.
"YEP, DADDY, THERE'S FOUR GIRLS
IN HERE AND ONLY ONE BOY."
YOU'RE PULLING YOUR
HAIR OUT, YOU'RE TRYING
TO PREPARE THE MEAL.
BUT THE JOYS OF
SEEING YOUR CHILDREN
WHEN WE'RE ALL TOGETHER
AS A FAMILY GOING TO THINGS,
IT'S JUST SO REWARDING
TO LOOK AT THEM AND BE LIKE,
"THESE ARE OUR CHILDREN.
THESE ARE OURS!"
Woman #2: THEY KNOW HOW MUCH
THEY LOVE MOMMY AND DADDY,
BUT YOU KNOW, YOU JUST
WANT THEM TO KNOW SO MUCH
THAT MOMMY AND DADDY LOVE THEM
JUST AS MUCH AND EVEN MORE.
LISA AND I KID AROUND
WITH EACH OTHER AND SAY,
"REMEMBER WHEN WE LIVED ON
MARKET STREET BY OURSELVES?
THOSE WERE THE DAYS."
AND WE WILL
KID AROUND ABOUT IT
BECAUSE WE CAN'T THINK
OF LIFE ANY OTHER WAY.
I CAN'T REALLY REMEMBER,
ALMOST LIKE I CAN'T REALLY
REMEMBER THAT,
AND I LOVE WATCHING
THEM GROW.
JOINING ME TODAY
IS CRYSTAL HOLMES,
OUR INTERNET
EXPERT FROM IBM.
- CAN THE INTERNET HELP PARENTS
WITH ISSUES ABOUT SIBLINGS?
- ABSOLUTELY.
THERE ARE A LOT OF SITES
FOR PARENTS ON THE INTERNET.
THE SITE WE'LL GO TO TODAY IS
THE PAMPERS PARENTING INSTITUTE.
THIS SITE HAS CHAT-ROOMS
THAT PARENTS CAN ASK
QUESTIONS OF OTHER PARENTS
ABOUT SIBLING ISSUES.
THEY ALSO CAN GO
TO BULLETIN BOARDS
TO SEE IF ANY ISSUES
HAVE ALREADY BEEN POSTED,
AND FIND OUT WHAT
OTHERS MIGHT SAY.
THERE ARE ALSO OPTIONS
TO ASK AN EXPERT A QUESTION.
OUR INTERNET QUESTION
TODAY COMES FROM LINDA
IN PENSACOLA, FLORIDA.
HER QUESTION IS,
"WHEN MY OLDEST DAUGHTER,
AMANDA, WAS 25 MONTHS OLD,
WE HAD ANOTHER BABY GIRL.
THE BABY IS NOW TWO MONTHS OLD
AND SINCE SHE HAS BEEN BORN,
MY OLDEST DAUGHTER
KEEPS SAYING,
'I WANNA GO HOME.'
SHE SAYS THIS
EVEN WHEN SHE IS HOME.
WHAT DOES SHE MEAN BY THIS,
AND HOW CAN WE HELP HER?"
WELL, I THINK IT'S OBVIOUS
WHAT SHE MEANS.
SHE WANTS TO GET BACK
TO THE WAY IT USED TO BE,
AND SHE'D PROBABLY LIKE
TO GET RID OF THAT SISTER
AND HAVE HER GO BACK
TO WHERE SHE USED TO BE.
BUT, YOU KNOW,
THAT'S NOT GONNA WORK.
SO I WOULD DO WHAT YOU CAN
TO MAKE UP TO HER.
I THINK YOU'RE BOTH MOURNING.
SHE'S MOURNING
FOR WHAT SHE'S LOST
IN THE WAY OF
HER RELATIONSHIP WITH YOU,
AND YOU'RE MOURNING
ABOUT IT TOO.
SO MAKE UP FOR IT
ANY WAY YOU CAN.
PICK HER UP IN BETWEEN TIMES
AND LOVE HER AND SAY,
"I MISS YOU BECAUSE I HAVE TO
PAY ATTENTION TO THE BABY."
TAKE HER OUT
ONCE A DAY BY HERSELF.
AND THEN ALSO,
I'D JUST LET HER
LEARN HOW TO ADJUST.
SHE'S GONNA HAVE TO.
THAT BABY'S HERE TO STAY.
Brazelton:
FOR MORE RESOURCES,
VISIT US ONLINE AT...
BRAZELTON ON PARENTING,
PRESENTED BY
THE PARENTING INSTITUTE
AT pampers.com.
WITH ME NOW
IS MERI WALLACE,
THERAPIST, EDUCATOR,
AND AUTHOR OF
"BIRTH ORDER BLUES."
MERI, IS THERE
A SORT OF AN EXPECTANCY
ABOUT, YOU KNOW,
WHAT EACH CHILD
IN A BIRTH ORDER MIGHT BE?
WELL, I'D LIKE
TO TALK ABOUT
THE KIND OF
EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCES
THAT A FIRST-BORN,
A MIDDLE-BORN
AND AN ONLY CHILD
WILL HAVE IN THE FAMILY,
AND THESE PARTICULAR
EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCES
WILL AFFECT WHAT HAPPENS TO
THEIR PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT.
A FIRST-BORN CHILD IS--
BENEFITS TREMENDOUSLY
FROM BEING THE SOLE FOCUS
OF THE PARENTS' ATTENTION,
AND CAN BE A LEADER,
AND CAN GROW UP
FEELING VERY CONFIDENT
BECAUSE OF ALL THE LOVE
HE RECEIVED.
AND HE CAN BECOME
A VERY, VERY HIGH ACHIEVER.
HOWEVER, THERE ARE
SOME CHALLENGES
THAT A FIRST-BORN WILL FACE.
THE FIRST-BORN CHILD IS OFTEN
PRESSURED VERY HIGHLY
BY HIS PARENTS TO SUCCEED,
BECAUSE THE PARENTS WANT TO FEEL
THAT THEY'RE VERY GOOD
AT THEIR JOB,
AND THAT THEIR CHILD
WILL HAVE A GOOD LIFE.
AND SO THE FIRST-BORN CHILD MAY
END UP BEING VERY SUCCESSFUL,
BUT MAY END UP BEING
VERY HARD ON HIMSELF.
- A PERFECTIONIST.
- YES.
- IT'S NOT EASY.
- NO.
AND THE SECOND CHILD OFTEN
IS A LITTLE BIT
MORE EASY-GOING,
WHY, BECAUSE THE PARENTS
ARE VERY MUCH MORE EDUCATED,
THEY UNDERSTAND
WHAT CHILDREN ARE LIKE,
THEY'RE CALMER,
AND SO THEY...
THEY ALSO HAVE
LESS TIME TO FOCUS
AND SCRUTINIZE
THEIR SECOND CHILD.
SO THE SECOND CHILD
CAN GO OUT INTO LIFE
FEELING MUCH MORE RELAXED.
HOWEVER, THE SECOND CHILD
OFTEN FEELS VERY INADEQUATE
BECAUSE HE LOOKS AT
HIS OLDER SISTER
WHO'S ABLE TO
RIDE A TWO-WHEELER
AND HE'S
ONLY RIDING A TRICYCLE,
AND HE CONCLUDES
"WHAT'S WRONG WITH ME?
THERE'S SOMETHING WRONG.
MAYBE I'M NOT AS GOOD."
A SECOND CHILD MIGHT BE
VERY HIGHLY COMPETITIVE.
WE OFTEN SEE SECOND-BORNS
WHO ARE EXTREMELY
COMPETITIVE AND...
- AND SUCCESSFUL AT IT.
- AND SUCCESSFUL, YES.
'CAUSE THEY'VE FOUND
THE ROLE FOR THEMSELVES
THAT'S DIFFERENT
FROM THE OLDER ONE?
YES, AND BECAUSE
THEY'RE TRYING SO HARD
TO BE AS GOOD
AND EVEN BETTER.
OR THE SECOND CHILD
MIGHT BECOME VERY INTIMIDATED
AND DECIDE "I CAN'T BE AS GOOD,
SO I MAY AS WELL NOT TRY."
AND IT'S VERY IMPORTANT
FOR PARENTS
TO EXPLAIN TO THE SECOND CHILD
IT'S AN AGE DIFFERENCE.
THERE'S NOTHING
WRONG WITH YOU,
YOU'RE JUST AS GOOD
AS YOUR OLDER BROTHER,
AND THEN THERE ARE OTHER STEPS
YOU NEED TO TAKE AS WELL.
YOU NEED TO ENCOURAGE
THE SECOND-BORN CHILD
TO TRY THINGS
THAT HE'S INTERESTED IN,
THAT HE'S SUCCESSFUL AT,
PRAISE THE YOUNGER CHILD.
PICK OUT SOMETHING
ABOUT HIM THAT STANDS OUT.
YES.
AND THAT WILL GIVE HIM
A GREAT DEAL OF CONFIDENCE.
AND THE THIRD CHILD?
THE THIRD CHILD
IS THE BABY OF THE FAMILY,
AND THE FAMILY
HAS TO BE VERY CAREFUL
NOT TO STEP IN AND TAKE OVER
AND DO EVERYTHING
FOR THIS YOUNGEST CHILD,
BECAUSE YOU WANT THIS CHILD
TO BECOME INDEPENDENT.
OTHERWISE, IN FACT,
THE THIRD CHILD,
THE YOUNGEST OF THE FAMILY,
CAN END UP GROWING UP
TO BE VERY DEPENDENT.
- TO BE A BABY.
- TO BE THE BABY.
AND I BET
MORE THIRD CHILDREN
ARE VULNERABLE CHILDREN
AS A RESULT OF THAT.
SOMETIMES,
THE PARENTS ARE SO BUSY
THEY'RE NOT GIVING
THE YOUNGER SIBLING
THAT EXTRA TIME AND ATTENTION,
THAT EXTRA STIMULATION.
AND IF A CHILD
FELT COMPETENT
ABOUT WHAT THEY
WERE TRYING TO DO
AND COULD BE RESPECTED
FOR THEIR INDIVIDUALITY,
THAT WOULD GIVE A CHILD BACK
AN UNDERSTANDING OF THEMSELVES
AND ALSO THE MOTIVE
TO DEAL WITH FINDING
A ROLE IN THE FAMILY,
AND THEN
FEELING GOOD ABOUT IT,
AND THEN BEING READY
TO FIND A ROLE IN,
YOU KNOW,
IN THE ENVIRONMENT.
IF YOU GIVE A CHILD
THE FEELING YOU'RE LOVED
AND YOU'RE SPECIAL TO US,
THEN YOU WILL CUT DOWN
ON THE KIND OF RIVALRY
WE SEE IN FAMILIES.
I THINK THERE'S A NORMAL
AMOUNT OF RIVALRY,
BUT IF YOU GIVE CHILDREN
THAT FEELING OF CONFIDENCE
THEN THAT WILL HAPPEN LESS.
AND SO IN A WAY,
WHAT YOU'VE EXPLAINED TO ME
IS THAT EACH
OF THESE CHILDREN
HAS TO GET BACK
THE FEELING THAT "I MATTER."
ABSOLUTELY.
THAT'S THE KEY.
AND I THINK THAT YOU
HAVE TO VALUE YOUR CHILD,
AND WHO THE CHILD IS,
AND NOT TRY TO PUSH THE CHILD
TO BE SOMETHING ELSE.
AND THE MOMENT
YOU STAY WITH YOUR CHILD
AND APPRECIATE HIM
FOR WHO HE IS,
HE WILL FEEL LOVED, AND HE
WILL BE VERY HAPPY IN LIFE.
Brazelton: NEXT, WE TALK TO
PARENTS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
Woman: WE'VE SOLD OUT.
WE HAVE OVER 900 PEOPLE...
Brazelton: EACH YEAR,
WE TRAVEL ALL OVER AMERICA...
Man: OUR COMMUNITY
IS SO EXCITED ABOUT THIS.
Brazelton:
...TO ANSWER QUESTIONS
FROM THOUSANDS OF PARENTS.
Emcee: I'D LIKE TO WELCOME
DR. T. BERRY BRAZELTON.
Brazelton:
HERE ARE SOME OF THEM.
- HI.
- Brazelton: HI.
MY NAME IS ANN-MARIE,
AND I'M THE YOUNGEST
OF THREE CHILDREN
WITH A LARGE SPAN IN AGES,
AND I'VE NEVER DEALT
WITH SIBLING RIVALRY.
I NOW HAVE A
TWO-AND-A-HALF YEAR OLD,
AND A FOUR-AND-A-HALF YEAR OLD,
WHO ARE GREAT KIDS,
BUT SEEM TO FIGHT
THE SECOND I LEAVE THE ROOM.
AND I KNOW THAT'S NORMAL.
I GUESS MY BIGGEST QUESTION
IS HOW DO I
HELP TO FOSTER
A GOOD RELATIONSHIP WITH THEM
AS THEY GROW UP TOGETHER?
Brazelton: BY STAYING OUT OF IT
AS MUCH AS YOU CAN.
BY TURNING IT BACK TO THEM.
THE SECOND YOU GET INTO IT,
YOU MAKE A TRIANGLE
AND THEY-- THEIR WHOLE FOCUS
THEN IS ON YOU,
NOT ON EACH OTHER.
AND SIBLING RIVALRY IS ONE WAY
THEY LEARN ABOUT EACH OTHER.
THINK WHAT THEY'RE LEARNING
WITH EACH OTHER.
HAVE YOU EVER
WATCHED THEM TOGETHER?
THEY LEARN A LOT.
AND A TWO-AND-A-HALF YEAR OLD
I'LL BET, CAN TAKE CARE OF
HIMSELF BY NOW, CAN'T HE?
- SHE.  AND SHE DOES.
- EXACTLY.
- THINK, ISN'T THAT REMARKABLE?
- YES.
AND THE FOUR-AND-A-HALF YEAR OLD
PROBABLY KNOWS WHERE
TO PUSH HER BUTTONS,
AND SO THEY'VE LEARNED
A LOT ABOUT EACH OTHER,
AND I ALWAYS SAY THAT RIVALRY
IS ONE SIDE OF A COIN,
AND CARING ABOUT
EACH OTHER IS THE OTHER.
OKAY.
AND WITHOUT
THAT OPPORTUNITY
TO DO IT DIRECTLY
WITH EACH OTHER
THEY REALLY DON'T EVER
GET THAT CLOSE.
SO I'D STAY OUT OF IT
AS MUCH AS YOU CAN.
AND THEN YOU MIGHT SAY,
"WELL, BUT THEY MIGHT
HURT EACH OTHER."
THEY DON'T.
IF YOU'RE THERE, THEY WILL.
BUT CHILDREN DON'T
IF YOU'RE NOT THERE.
I FIND MORE OFTEN THEY DO IT
WHEN I LEAVE THE ROOM.
- IS THAT TO GET MY ATTENTION?
- GET YOU BACK.
- DON'T YOU?
- YES.  I'D BE UPSTAIRS,
AND THAT'S WHEN THEY START,
AND THAT'S WHAT CONCERNS ME
WHEN THE SCREAMING AND THE...
AND THEY'RE BACK
DO I STEP IN?  DO I...?
MAYBE YOU HAVE
TO PREPARE FOR THAT
AND SAY AS YOU'RE
LEAVING THE ROOM,
"YOU KNOW,
I'M NOT GOING TO HEAR YOU.
I'VE GOT THE TV UP TOO LOUD,
SO WHATEVER YOU DO
IS UP TO YOU GUYS.
AND HERE ARE THE BAND-AIDS
AND HERE..."
( laughs )
"HERE IS THE IPECAC
IN CASE YOU INGEST FOOD."
AND JUST REALLY LET 'EM KNOW
THAT IT'S UP TO THEM.
EVEN WITH A TWO-YEAR OLD?
SHE'S ON HER OWN?
ESPECIALLY WITH
A TWO-YEAR-OLD.
I'LL BET SHE'S THE INSTIGATOR
IN MOST CASES.
OH, YES.
SHE IS.
I HAD A LITTLE BROTHER,
AND I COULD HAVE KILLED HIM
UNTIL HE WAS 50.
BUT THEY SHOULD BE OKAY
FOR THE LONG RUN?
- TRY IT.
- OKAY.  THANK YOU.
( applause )
MY NAME IS ROBIN
AND I'D LIKE TO KNOW
IF IT'S NORMAL FOR MY SON
WHO IS 20 MONTHS OLDER
THAN MY DAUGHTER,
TO TACKLE HER, HIT HER.
HE DOESN'T PLAY WITH HER,
HE WOULD RATHER
WRESTLE WITH HER.
MY DAUGHTER'S
THIRTEEN MONTHS OLD,
MY SON IS TWO YEARS,
NINE MONTHS.
SHE TRIES TO BITE HIM,
WHICH I TRY TO STOP.
WHY DO YOU STOP HER
FROM FIGHTING BACK?
IF IT'S A PROCESS
OF FIGHTING OVER A TOY,
THEN I LET HER FIGHT BACK.
BUT IF SHE WANTS
TO BITE HIM,
I DON'T REALLY
WANT HER TO BITE HIM.
- YOU DON'T LIKE BITING?
-NO.
IT IS AN ISSUE FOR
ALMOST ALL TODDLERS.
RIGHT.
BUT IT SOUNDS LIKE
SHE'S TRYING TO LEARN
HOW TO MANAGE HIM HERSELF
RATHER THAN
HAVING YOU STEP IN.
AND YOU DO STEP IN
EVERY TIME?
- I DO.
- DO YOU?
YOU CLENCH YOUR TEETH?
IS IT, "I'M GONNA
GET BACK IN THERE
AND I'LL TRY NOT TO
BITE HIM MYSELF,
BUT I'M READY TO"?
THAT'S EXACTLY HOW I FEEL.
I CAN SEE THAT.
AND I FEEL LIKE
MY HUSBAND AND I
ARE ALWAYS ON TOP OF HIM,
"STOP IT, LEAVE HER ALONE,"
AND INSTEAD OF REWARDING HIM
FOR THE GOOD THINGS
THAT HE DOES,
AND MY HUSBAND DOES
WRESTLE WITH HIM,
AND I DON'T KNOW IF THAT
HAS SOMETHING TO DO
WITH WHY HE THINKS HE
SHOULD WRESTLE HIS SISTER.
WELL, I DON'T EITHER,
BUT IT SOUNDS WONDERFUL.
I THINK THAT HE
SOMETIMES IS JEALOUS,
BECAUSE WE HAVE TO GIVE HER
A LOT OF ATTENTION,
AND I TRY TO DO
A LOT WITH HIM
SO THAT HE DOESN'T
FEEL LEFT OUT.
AND HE JUST
STARTED PRE-SCHOOL,
SO I THINK THAT MAKES
THE PROBLEM EVEN WORSE,
BECAUSE HE FIGURES I'M
LEAVING HIM AND I'M WITH HER.
SURE. IT'S REALLY VERY
PAINFUL FOR YOU.
YOU TALK ABOUT DESERTING HIM
AS IF IT WERE A REAL DESERTION.
IT'S JUST AWFUL.
AND HE PLAYS WELL
WITH OTHER CHILDREN,
AND HE LISTENS TO ME
AT PLAY-GROUP.
BUT IT'S HIS SISTER, AS IF
HE'S SO ANGRY I HAD HER.
YEAH.
AND SOMETIMES
IT BREAKS MY HEART,
BECAUSE I FEEL LIKE
"OH, I DID ALL THIS."
YOU FEEL LIKE,
"I SHOULDN'T HAVE HAD HER."
I JUST DIDN'T KNOW IF
THERE WAS ANYTHING I COULD DO
TO TRY AND STOP THE FIGHTING.
- THE SIBLING RIVALRY?
- MM-HMM.
WELL, I'M JUST WONDERING
HOW REALLY IMPORTANT IT IS
TO STOP IT,
OR WHETHER IT'S...
WHETHER YOU'RE MAKING IT,
YOU KNOW,
HEIGHTENING IT A LITTLE BIT
BY TRYING TO STOP IT.
BUT YOU CAN UNDERSTAND WHY
THE OLDER CHILD
FEELS SHOWED UP, CAN'T YOU?
I DO.
YOUR VOICE BEGINS TO
EVEN CRACK UP A LITTLE BIT
- IF YOU TALK OF...
- 'CAUSE I FEEL BAD FOR HIM.
YEAH, AND MAYBE YOU'RE RIGHT.
AT 13 MONTHS, MAYBE SHE ISN'T
QUITE READY YET TO ...
YOU KNOW, TO LEAVE,
TO FIGHT IT OUT.
WHEN THEY CAN
DEAL WITH IT THEMSELVES,
THEY'RE GONNA HAVE A LOT
BETTER RELATIONSHIP.
AND I'LL TELL YOU, I'VE NEVER
HEARD OF A CHILD HURTING A BABY
UNLESS THERE'S
A PARENT INVOLVED.
NOW THAT MEANS YOU'VE
GOT TO LEAVE THE ROOM
BY SAYING "LOOK,
IT'S UP TO YOU GUYS
TO FIGURE OUT
HOW TO MAKE IT GO
'CAUSE I'M NO GOOD FOR YOU."
AND THEN CLOSE THE DOOR FIRMLY,
- AND SEE WHAT HAPPENS.
- OKAY.
I THINK THAT YOU'VE GOT
SOME WONDERFUL INSIGHTS.
THANK YOU,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
Brazelton: FOR TAPES
AND TRANSCRIPTS CALL...
OR LOG ON AT...
BRAZELTON ON PARENTING,
PRESENTED BY
THE PARENTING INSTITUTE
AT pampers.com.
RAISING MORE THAN ONE CHILD
PRESENTS A PARENT WITH
SOME PRETTY BIG CHALLENGES.
BUT FOR ALL THE TROUBLE
AND CONSTANT BICKERING,
THE TRUTH IS THAT
A SIBLING GIVES A CHILD
A UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY
TO LEARN ABOUT THE WORLD.
HOW TO STAND UP FOR YOURSELF,
HOW TO NEGOTIATE,
HOW TO SHARE--
THESE ARE IMPORTANT SKILLS,
AND WORKING IT OUT
WITH A BROTHER OR A SISTER
IS HOW KIDS DEVELOP THEM.
SO THROUGH ALL THE TURMOIL,
KEEP PERSPECTIVE,
AND REALIZE HOW MUCH YOUR KIDS
MEAN TO EACH OTHER,
NOW, AND FOR THE REST
OF THEIR LIVES.
( theme music playing )